It happened.
>> Zoran Madani [music] wins New York's
meal election.
>> This is a historic win.
>> Tonight, [singing] you have delivered a
mandate for [music] change.
>> This 34year-old state assemblyman,
largely unknown a year ago, got plenty
of push back.
>> I [music] believe that Zoran Mandani is
a threat to my constituents.
>> I disagree wholeheartedly with Zoran
Mandami. [music] Yet, despite rattling
even members of his own party, his bold
ideas have struck a chord with New
Yorkers.
>> Wall Street has been clearly [music]
humbled with this race. Initially, they
thought his campaign was a joke. Then,
they worked hard to defeat him, used
insults.
>> This is a story of a very [music] savvy,
young, upstart candidate who knew
exactly what the pain points were of New
Yorkers.
>> We're going to build a city where
[music] no one has to struggle to
survive. He knew how to communicate to
them in a way that [music] his opponent
simply wasn't able to.
>> We're voting you off the island.
>> And his [music] popularity has gained a
certain someone's attention, making many
wonder if it could spill out over
[music] to the rest of the country.
>> For everyone.
>> He's a disaster. That's a terrible thing
for our country. He's a communist.
>> There is a segment that is reaping the
benefits of the market boom. But there
are many other segments of this society
that have been languishing. Something's
clearly broken. And that is how you get
a mayor like Manny
>> also says [music] something about where
voters not just in New York City but
maybe across the country are in terms of
what [music] they think the solutions
are to the country's affordability
problems.
>> So how did the capital [music] of
capitalism end up electing a mayor who's
a democratic socialist?
>> [cheering]
>> New York City, the city that never
sleeps. But when New Yorkers do, they're
usually in a rental. Roughly two out of
three lease their home.
>> The rent is too damn high.
>> New York City has been an expensive
place for decades.
>> Our children can't afford to live
[music] in. There was a candidate for
governor named Jimmy McMillan who ran on
a [music] platform that he called the
rent is too damn high. He also ran for
mayor and he was sort of seen as a not
serious candidate at the time but
[music] the argument I think a lot of
people would argue was valid.
>> Rent burden is traditionally thought of
as a problem for the working class but
now it's knocking on the doors of the
city's highest earners.
I'm talking about people who are earning
between $100,000 and $300,000 a year who
for the first time are considered rent
burdened. They're spending more than a
third of their take-home pay on their
rent.
>> The rent is so crazy in the Bronx. I
don't know how.
>> When pop stars are complaining about
rent, you know, the housing crunch is no
joke.
>> The city has been really jolted by the
effects of the pandemic. [music]
And since then, we've seen the prices of
rents spike astronomically.
>> Whether it's landlords clawing back co
era losses or tons of luxury
development, rents citywide climbed 27%
between 2020 and 2024, outpacing other
major US metros. But all costs of living
are going up. Grocery prices have been
on the rise for most of the past 5 years
with New York City outpacing the
national average.
and full-time daycare can cost $26,000 a
year per child. The Mom Donnie campaign
zeroed in on this crisis and offered up
some pointed policies to address them.
The question is, [music]
how much can he really achieve?
One of his most popular proposals is a
rent freeze, and the truth is he could
get this done.
The mayor appoints all nine members of
this body called the rent guidelines
board. Those members tend to vote the
way that the mayor who appointed them
wants them to. The plan, [music]
however, would only apply to the city's
nearly 1 million rentstabilized
apartments. [music] And questions remain
how this will ease the strain on
renters. For people who live in those
rent stabilized apartments, freezing the
rent is a [music] really significant
factor in in maintaining affordability
for them. The issue is that according to
the landlords, the cost of operating
those buildings have become really
really expensive [music]
and so there is this criticism of his
plan which is that it could actually
result in lower supply of apartments.
Two other campaign proposals were free
buses and free child care for young
kids. Ideas that are pretty popular with
other New York politicians. It's really
possible that the state could agree to
give him some money to fund fast and
free buses, which he said would cost
about $750 million. It's possible that
they could give him some money to help
pay for a little bit of the universal
child care program that he's promised.
>> Child care is more expensive than
people's rent. Another M Donnie idea is
to launch city-run supermarkets.
>> Grocery prices are out of control.
>> The pilot program is actually cheaper
than some of his other proposals and
could end up in the city budget.
>> The idea is to open a grocery store in
each burough where the city is [music]
controlling the prices in order to offer
people a more affordable option.
In order [music] to help pay for such
programs, Mumani has proposed a 2% tax
increase on residents earning more than
$1 million a year, as well as a bump to
the state's corporate tax rate. This has
Wall Street and some in the broader
business community [music] warning of
blowback.
The reality [music] is the services that
we provide to the people of our city and
our state significantly rely on the
profits of Wall Street.
>> Millionaires paid about 40% of all
personal income taxes in New York State.
>> They are essential to the operation of
things like the schools in New York.
>> But the rich are also earning a lot
more. Nearly 30% of all income reported
in New York State went to millionaires.
[music]
>> And don't get mom Donnie started about
billionaires.
>> I don't think that we should have
billionaires. For a man who said he
doesn't like the idea of billionaires
running for an important seat in a city
full of them once again revives
conversations about the potential for
the power center shifting away from New
York. [music]
>> But Mani's control over taxes is very
limited. The mayor of New York City
[music] has almost no authority to raise
revenue on his own. He needs the
approval of the state legislature and
the approval of New York Governor Kathy
Hokll. Any tax increase has to come
across [music] my desk first. I will
work with whomever the mayor is as long
as they want to help foster my policies,
which is progrowth, pro business.
>> New York's finances aren't helped by
this so-called big beautiful bill
slashing federal funding to social
programs nationwide. New York is facing
a budget hole and it's also facing cuts
from the federal government that it's
going to have to contend with [music] in
the years to come. The jobs are
basically where they were before the
pandemic happened. [music] But but
subway ridership, for example, is 74% of
where it was. Office vacancy is double
from what it was before the pandemic.
[music] So the question is, will mom
Donnie get any money from Albany to run
any of his social programs or will New
Yorkers actually getting a tax increase
regardless because of the budget gap
[music] and that money probably won't go
to M Donnie?
>> Yet a massive wealth flight from New
York City seems unlikely and business
leaders have softened on Mam Donnie.
We've
>> seen some of this rhetoric before. Not
all of that rhetoric panned into the
reality of a mass exodus from the city.
And often times what happens is business
leaders realize that simply repeating
the threat of leaving the city will be
seen as somewhat of a selfish act.
>> Many of them are saying that they found
him to be a good listener.
>> I can see why he's in a position he's
in. He was articulate, engaging.
>> If he becomes mayor, I will call him and
offer my help.
Mom Dani has shown a pension for finding
commonalities between groups. For a long
time in New York, the key to winning
election has been to [music] cobble
together a coalition of different ethnic
groups. What Mam Donnie has done is
appeal to people on an economic
argument.
>> Thank you to the next generation of New
Yorkers who refuse to ACCEPT THAT THE
PROMISE OF A BETTER FUTURE WAS A RELIC
OF THE PAST.
And he's managed to do this despite
opposition and political attacks over
his fierce criticism of Israel, an issue
that remains divisive within the
Democratic party.
>> All of this comes at a time of rising
anti-semitism in New York, home to the
largest number of Jews outside of
Israel. For someone who is so prominent
a critic of the Israeli government to
succeed and and win in New York City
represents a sea change in the city's
political alignment. That has some New
Yorkers and some Jewish New Yorkers
really concerned
>> to be Muslim in New York.
>> Mamani himself has been the subject of
Islamophobic attacks. [music]
He'll be the first Muslim mayor of New
York City ever in 400 years. He'll be
the first South Asian mayor. Population
of Asian-Americans has grown to be
somewhere around 15%. It's the fastest
growing ethnic [music] group in New York
City. New York will remain a city of
immigrants, a city built by immigrants,
and [music] as of tonight, led by an
immigrant.
>> Mamani's brand of populism has some
leaders in the Democratic Party taking
notes.
>> This result will have a massive impact
[music] on how the Democratic Party
decides to tackle the midterm elections
and the general election. But in New
York City, Mandani's success will hinge
on bringing everyone to the table.
>> If the business community doesn't feel
welcome here, it doesn't necessarily
mean that they're going to take their
business elsewhere, but it may just mean
that they don't invest in the future
here. [music]
>> Now that he is in office, they will have
to engage with him to shape the city in
the direction that they would like to
see it go.
>> [music]
[music]
>> I look forward to the feeling [music]
the whole thing that you put in me. It's
hurting me.